Armenia, the historical land of the Armenians, which at its zenith stretched from the Black Sea to the Caspian Sea and from the Mediterranean to Lake Urmia in what is now Iran. In classical times the land was bounded on the north by Iberia (modern Georgia) and Albania (modern Azerbaijan) and on the south by the Mesopotamian desert. The Anatolian provinces of Pontus, Cappadocia, and Cilicia bordered it on the west, and Lake Urmia and ancient Persia formed the boundary on the east. Translated into contemporary terms and based on a combination of historical and ethnic factors, the land of the Armenians would include the regions around Akhalts'ikhe and south of T'bilisi in the Georgia, Karabakh, and Nakhichevan areas of Azerbaijan, present-day Armenia in its entirety, the corner of Iran northwest of Lake Urmia, and the territories of Turkey around the cities of Van (including Lake Van), Trabzon, Erzurum, Sivas, Bitlis, and Diyarbakir.

The political boundaries of the country have been extremely elastic, frequently and convulsively altered by war, conquest, dismemberment, and internal political fragmentation. The people of Armenia have been despoiled, transplanted, and decimated by war and occupation, and the country has been subjected to a succession of intruding tribes and peoples, who have intermingled with the indigenous inhabitants, superimposing upon the population their languages, religions, and cultures, all of which have left their imprint in varying degrees. Consequently, historical and ethnic claims to the area have often conflicted, and various nations have been equally fervent in claiming many of the regions of historical Armenia.

Land and Natural Resources
The Armenian plateau is rugged and varied, with an average elevation exceeding 6,000 feet (1,800 meters). It is marked by clusters of jagged volcanic mountains and cleft by ravines and gorges whose soft lava has been deeply carved by swiftly flowing streams. Four great rivers, the Tigris, Euphrates, Kura, and Araks (Aras, Araxes), have their sources in the plateau. Three large lakes, Van, Urmia, and Sevan, are framed in triangular symmetry in the eastern part.

Much of Turkish Armenia is covered by recent volcanic outpourings, and the soil cover is frequently very thin or nonexistent. Most of the barren lava uplands are uninhabited. The rivers often lie several thousand feet below the level of the plateau, and although their upper reaches are too narrow for settlement, rich alluvial deposits lower down have invited cultivation.

Armenia's most famous landmark, Mount Ararat, lies in modern Turkey. It rises to more than 17,000 feet (5,100 meters), and its perpetually snow-clad summit is visible from virtually every corner of Armenia. The fertile Ararat plain lies in Armenia. Always the most densely populated section of Armenia, the Ararat plain today supports more than half the population of Armenia. Copiously supplied with water by the Araks River, the Ararat plain rivals the Lake Van basin as the Armenian heartland.

Overlooking the Ararat plain and the Araks valley from the north in the Republic of Armenia are Mount Aragats (Alagez), more than 13,000 feet (4,000 meters) high, and the Ara Mountains. To the south of Ararat are two arching mountain chains, the Aladagh and the Taurus. To the east of the Ararat plain in present-day Azerbaijan are the Karabakh Mountains.

The climate of Armenia is extremely varied. The summers are short, hot, and arid in the lowlands but mild and pleasant in the highlands. The winters are long, extremely cold, and severe, and precipitation is abundant.

Armenia is not generously endowed by nature, but in the artificially irrigated lowlands, semitropical crops such as tobacco, cotton, and apricots are cultivated as well as fine grapes, peaches, pears, apples, grains, rice, and nuts. Cattle and horse breeding is important in the north. The mountains are relatively rich in minerals and are mined for their copper, tin, iron, gold, and silver and quarried for their granite, tufa, basalt, and marble. The region is also endowed with abundant mineral springs.

History
Armenia first appears in recorded history in Assyrian inscriptions of the 9th century B.C. as Urartu, a powerful kingdom forged out of a union or confederation of indigenous tribes. Sometimes called the Vannic kingdom, the Urartean state was founded in the middle of the 9th century B.C. by Arame, the legendary national hero also known as Aram. Between 810 and 733 B.C. Urartu reached the zenith of its power and influence, extending from Lake Sevan and the Kura River in the north to the Euphrates River in the west and Lake Urmia in the east. Thereafter the kingdom declined. The Assyrians moved up from the south and plundered the country. The Scythians and Cimmerians swarmed down from the north, the Medes and Persians from the east, and the Phrygians and Armenians from the west.

The Armenians were a branch of the Thraco-Phrygian tribes that had crossed into Anatolia from the Balkans. The term Armenia dates from the 6th century B.C. and seems to be the Persian designation for the Armeno-Phrygian conquerors of the area, who may have been called Armens. The Armenians established themselves as the new ruling aristocracy, imposed their Indo-European language upon the native population, and later intermingled with them to form the basic Armenian nation. This nation has tenaciously preserved its national and cultural identity, although repeatedly invaded, conquered, and ruled by others.

Armenia under the Achaemenids and Seleucids
The Armeno-Phrygians acknowledged the suzerainty of the Medes and were later incorporated into the Persian empire of the Achaemenids. The country emerged as Armenia, a rebellious province (satrapy) of the Persian empire, for the first time in the famous Behistun inscription of Darius. When the Persian empire was conquered by Alexander in 331 B.C., the Persian satrap of Armenia declared his loyalty to Alexander. However, much of Armenia in the north successfully resisted inclusion in Alexander's empire, retaining its independence under local kings and chieftains.

With the death of Alexander in 323 B.C., the former satraps of the Achaemenids in the Armenian territories acknowledged the nominal suzerainty of the Seleucids, Alexander's successors in the east, and Armenia was increasingly subjected to the influences of Hellenistic culture and civilization. In 189 B.C., after the Seleucid Antiochus was defeated by the Romans at Magnesia, two Armenian princes, Artashes (Artaxias) and Zareh (Zariades), established two independent Armenian kingdoms: Armenia Major, with Artashes as king; and Armenia Minor, (Sophene) under Zareh.

Artashes's Dynasty
Artashes built a new capital, Artashat (Artaxata), and established a dynasty that not only preserved Armenia's independence but also expanded Armenia's territory.

Armenia reached the zenith of both its power and its territorial expansion under Tigranes (Dikran, reigned 95–55 B.C.), who gathered all the Armenian lands under his rule and extended the boundaries of Greater Armenia from the Caspian Sea to the borders of Egypt and from the Caucasus to Ecbatana (Hamadan). In 83 B.C. he accepted the crown of the diminished Seleucid empire from the strife-ridden ruling aristocracy of Antioch. Northern Syria and Cilicia were incorporated into Tigranes's domains as a satrapy, with Antioch as the capital, and southern Syria, Lebanon, and Palestine remained vassal states recognizing Tigranes's suzerainty. His empire was essentially the work of a single dominating personality. It was not animated by a common purpose nor was it held together by common bonds of language, culture, or religion. Nevertheless, Armenia under Tigranes flourished culturally and economically. A new capital, Tigranocerta (Tigranakert), was audaciously constructed north of the Tigris River rather than in the mountain fortress of the Armenian heartland. It became an important center of Hellenistic culture.

Tigranes's empire was short-lived. He was not able to withstand the repeated assaults of the Romans in the west or of the Parthians in the east, and the empire finally became a client state of Rome. As a buffer battleground between Rome and the Parthian empire (and its successor, Sasanid Persia), Armenia was subjected to a prolonged period of invasion and was finally partitioned between the two empires.

The Artashes dynasty came to an ignominious end with Tigranes IV, who was deposed by Augustus around 1 A.D. For the next three centuries the Armenian throne was occupied by a succession of dynasties, most of them of Parthian origin. The most important of these dynasties, the Arshakuni (Arsacid), was quickly Armenianized and survived in Armenia. In Parthia it was deposed by the Sasanids.

Byzantine and Sasanid Rule
Roman influence prevailed in Armenia after the treaty of Nisibis with Persia (298 A.D.), and Tiridates (Trdat) III, an Arshakuni, was restored to the Armenian throne under Roman protection. Three years later Tiridates was converted to Christianity by Gregory the Illuminator, and Armenia entered a new stage in its history as the world's first Christian state. This conversion inevitably plunged Armenia into renewed conflict with the Zoroastrian Sasanids of Persia. Armenia was partitioned between Byzantium and Persia, about four-fifths of Armenia passing under Persian control in 387 A.D.

Byzantium and Persia governed their respective areas through native Armenian princes, called nakharars. Though the Persians often took punitive action against individual Armenian princes, they did not attempt to destroy the feudal system, whereas the Byzantines attempted to curb the nakharars' power by abolishing hereditary claims to local offices and instituting a system of appointment by the emperor.

Despite the division and weakness of the country, Christianity provided a common bond that gave rise to a powerful sense of national distinctiveness, consciousness, and cohesion, which was almost immediately reinforced by the invention of the Armenian alphabet by Mesrop early in the 5th century. The Armenian Church's refusal to accept the decisions of the Council of Chalcedon in 451 transformed the Armenian Church into an ethnocentric rather than an ecumenical force. In the same year, Vartan II Mamikonian rallied the Armenian nobility and peasantry around the twin standards of nationalism and Christianity in a revolt against the Sasanids. After a series of minor victories, the small Armenian force was decisively crushed, and Vartan Mamikonian and the flower of the Armenian aristocracy perished on the battlefield.

The adoption of Christianity alienated and isolated Armenia from Zoroastrian Persia; the choice of a heretical path simultaneously alienated and isolated Armenia from Rome and Byzantium; the invention of a national alphabet severed Armenia's fragile cultural bonds with the West; and the martyrdom of Vartan Mamikonian provided Armenia with a national hero, further reinforcing the Armenian sense of isolation, self-reliance, and ethnocentrism. All of these factors contributed to the development of a strong sense of national consciousness, centuries before its advent on the western European scene.

Bagratid Dynasty
With the Sasanid empire's collapse in the 7th century, the Armenian provinces of Persia passed under the nominal control of the Arab caliphate. By the terms of a treaty of 653, the Armenian nakharars accepted Arab suzerainty in return for the preservation of their local power and privileges. Armenia was plunged into constant turmoil not only by the attempts of the Byzantines to expand their power in Armenia at the expense of the caliphate but also by fierce internal rivalries among powerful princely families. Early in the 8th century the Bagratuni princes gained the ascendancy. In 885 the kingdom of Armenia was reestablished under Ashot V, a Bagratuni.

The Bagratid dynasty, however, was unable to consolidate and maintain its control over all the Armenian provinces. It was constantly challenged by other princes, who by the middle of the 10th century had succeeded in establishing five other autonomous Armenian kingdoms as well as several smaller principalities. The Bagratuni kings established themselves at Ani. Under King Gagik Bagratuni I (reigned 989–1020) the Bagratid kingdom ushered in a golden age in Armenia, in which culture, learning, trade, and commerce prospered, but Armenia's independence once again came to an end as Byzantium gradually annexed the Armenian kingdoms and principalities. In 1071 Byzantium itself was defeated at Manzikert by the Seljuk Turks, who annexed eastern Anatolia and incorporated Armenia into their dominions.

Lesser Armenia
Seljuk domination of Armenia encouraged Armenian immigration into the Byzantine empire, particularly to Cilicia. Armenia's aristocracy was virtually eliminated, and its peasant population was abandoned to the mercies of its new overlords. Some of the Armenian nobility established small baronies and principalities on Byzantine territory. The most important of these, the principality of Cilicia (called Lesser Armenia), declared its independence under the Armenian prince Rupen in 1080. Under Prince Levon II (reigned 1187–1219), this principality was transformed into a kingdom, which managed to survive for nearly 200 years.

Meanwhile, the Mongols had displaced the Seljuks in Armenia proper, and the country was subjected to devastation and slaughter. In 1375 Lesser Armenia was incorporated into the Mamluk empire. It was the last independent Armenian state until the 20th century.

Ottoman Rule
After the death of the Mongol leader Tamerlane in 1405, Armenia was divided, the Ottoman empire controlling one part, and Persia the other. Persian Armenia developed close economic ties with neighboring Christian Georgia and in 1828 was incorporated into the Russian empire, which also absorbed Kars and Ardahan from Turkey in 1878.

After the fall of Constantinople to the Turks in 1453, the sultan established a new Armenian patriarchate of Constantinople in 1461 and invested it with supreme ecclesiastical and civil jurisdiction not only over all Armenians within the Ottoman empire but also over all other Eastern Christians except the Greek Orthodox. The various non-Muslim religious communities under Ottoman rule were allowed considerable internal religious and cultural autonomy as long as they refrained from political agitation. This was formally institutionalized in the millet system. As the head of the Armenian millet, the patriarch of Constantinople was in effect a combined ecclesiastical-political leader of the Armenian nation. Constantinople inevitably became the real center of Armenian ecclesiastical and national life. By 1800 the Armenian community of Constantinople numbered about 150,000.

During the early centuries of Ottoman rule, the Armenian community was shown preferential treatment by the sultans. A new merchant bourgeoisie arose, whose loyalty to the Armenian Church and fidelity to Armenian traditions were unimpeachable, but whose dependence upon the goodwill of the Ottoman authorities for their economic prosperity and social status rendered them politically pliable and willing instruments of the existing status quo. Inhabiting the main urban centers of the Ottoman empire, the wealthy Armenian bourgeoisie were geographically isolated and politically and socially alienated from their peasant compatriots, who continued to live in misery and oppression in the Armenian districts of eastern Anatolia and Cilicia. The Armenian merchants and bankers eschewed nationalistic politics. They eventually established oligarchical control of the partriarchate and reduced it to an instrument of their vested interests rather than of the interests of the Armenian community as a whole.

The situation was mitigated by the growth of an Armenian petite bourgeoisie and intelligentsia, who were in turn encouraged and supported by the Ottoman government. The power of the oligarchs was finally broken with the promulgation of the Armenian National Constitution in 1863 as an imperial edict, providing for a more representative form of self-government. The leadership of the Armenian nation was seized by the Armenian revolutionary intelligentsia allied with the church. Inspired by the success of the Balkan peoples in their bid for independence, church and intelligentsia joined to produce a heady elixir of nationalism. The intelligentsia mobilized the support of the petite bourgeoisie and peasantry in their demands for an independent or autonomous Armenia.

Massacre and Dispersion of the Armenians
The growth of Armenian nationalism aroused the suspicion and wrath of Sultan Abdul-Hamid II (reigned 1876–1909). From 1876 to 1877 the Armenian quarter of Constantinople was burned and looted by Turkish soldiers and police. Then, in a series of barbaric massacres that started in 1894, nearly 200,000 Armenians were slain during a period of two years. These butcheries were both a cause of and a response to the series of sporadic acts of terrorism visited upon Turkish officials by Armenian terrorist groups, led largely by intellectuals, who thought they could simultaneously terrorize the sultan into granting reforms and arouse the European powers to intervene on behalf of Armenian independence.

The Young Turk revolution of 1908 raised false hopes of a Turkish-Armenian reconciliation, but the national interests of the two nations were by now incompatible and irreconcilable. The massacre of Armenians was resumed with renewed fury in 1909, this time in Cilicia, and was arrested only after the intervention of the great powers, including the United States. The outbreak of World War I sealed the fate of the Turkish Armenians, whose unabashed sympathy for the Allied cause and embrace of the invading Russian armies impelled the Young Turk regime to attempt to settle the troublesome Armenian problem by annihilating the Armenians in Turkey. More than a million Armenians perished by deportation to the Syrian desert; thousands converted to Islam; another million survived the deportations or were evacuated by the retreating Russian armies on the Caucasian front.

The Allied promise to reestablish an independent Armenian state in its historic provinces was never carried out. Definitive frontiers for an independent Armenia, with access to the Black Sea at Trebizond, were drawn by U.S. president Woodrow Wilson in November 1920, but the area had already been overwhelmed in October by the resurgent Turks, who succeeded in detaching Kars and Ardahan from Russian Armenia as well. On Dec. 20, 1920, an Armenian Soviet republic was proclaimed in Yerevan by the Armenian Communist party, under the protection and control of Bolshevik Russia.

People and Culture
The People
Each invasion or conquest of Armenia and each migration into the land has left not only a genetic and biological imprint but also a linguistic, cultural, and religious stamp on the people of the region. But the Urartean origins of the Armenian people are still reflected in legend, myth, national traditions, place names, race, and language. Many legendary heroes (such as Haik, Aram, and Ara) and national myths of Armenia are pre–Indo-European in origin and are probably misty survivals of the Urartean or even pre-Urartean period.

Physically the Armenians reflect the genetic infusion and fusion of the various strains of the Caucasian racial type that have swept back and forth across the country. The Armenoid physical type, which is the most prevalent, represents a stabilized racial blend between Mediterranean and Alpine types, probably dating from Neolithic times. It is characterized by a round, high-vaulted skull and a prominent, high-bridged, convex nose. The hair is usually brown or black; the eyes are large and hazel, brown, or black in color, often framed by bushy eyebrows; the skin color ranges from pinkish white to swarthy, with intermediate hues more in evidence; the height is moderate; and the body is stocky and sometimes generously endowed with hair. About 50% of the Armenians belong to the Armenoid type, while the Alpine and Mediterranean physical types account for about 20% each, and Nordic features are dominant in the remaining 10%.

Armenian colonies are found in virtually every corner of the globe. Each migration, invasion, or conquest has invariably resulted in the exodus of some Armenians. In the late 20th century the majority of Armenians live in the Republic of Armenia and the surrounding areas. The many Armenians living elsewhere, many in Europe and North America, can no longer be described as a part of the Armenian nation-in-exile. However, the Armenian communities in the Middle East still regard themselves as part of the Armenian nation. Since World War II more than 100,000 Armenians have been repatriated to Armenia, mainly from the Middle East.

Language
The Armenian language is the only surviving member of the Thracian branch of the Indo-European group of languages. Thought to be an offshoot of Phrygian, Armenian has been a spoken idiom since before the 6th century B.C. but has been a written language only since the 5th century A.D. According to some philologists, the Armenian language represents the superimposition of an Indo-European language upon an ancient indigenous Caucasian language, probably that spoken by the Urarteans.

Words of Iranian origin, both Parthian and Persian, are numerous in the Armenian vocabulary and date from the earliest times. The vocabulary contains so many loanwords from Iranian dialects that the language was once mistakenly classified as an Iranian language. Words of Greek and Syriac origin are largely scientific and ecclesiastical. Turkish terms appear mainly in the vernacular.

Written Armenian can be divided into classical Armenian (Grabar), which dates from the 5th century and is still employed as the scholarly and liturgical language, and contemporary Armenian (Ashkharabar), which dates from the middle of the 15th century and is the language of modern Armenian literature and newspapers. There are two main spoken dialects—Western Armenian and Eastern Armenian, the latter being closer to the classical language.

Both classical and modern Armenian are written in the same alphabet, which originally had 36 letters but now has 38. According to tradition, the alphabet was the creation of Mesrop, assisted by Sahak and a Greek named Rufanos, about 400 A.D. It appears to have been heavily influenced by the Greek alphabet, especially the vowels, the direction of the writing, and the upright and regular position of the characters. It is remarkably well suited to the phonetic values of the language, and it has undergone virtually no alteration in form or structure.

Religion
Before the adoption of Christianity as Armenia's state religion around 300 A.D., the religions of Armenia reflected the dominant polytheistic forms of pagan religious life prevalent in the Mediterranean and the Near East. Many of the local gods worshiped by the Urarteans later survived under new names, to be identified with or joined by a procession of Armenian, Greek, Persian, and Mesopotamian deities.

About 150 years after it was Christianized, Armenia rejected the decisions of the Council of Chalcedon in 451 A.D. In doing so the Armenian Church irrevocably embarked upon the hazardous and lonely path of an independent, idiosyncratic national church to which only Armenians belong. To this day the small Armenian Church preserves its pristine national exclusiveness, recognizes the supremacy of no other spiritual jurisdiction, and considers itself the equal of Rome and Istanbul. See also Armenian Church.

Although the great majority of religious Armenians belong to the Armenian Apostolic Church, many Armenians are also affiliated with Rome or belong to various Protestant congregations. The Armenian Catholic Church, which acknowledges the supremacy of the pope in Rome, dates from 1740, but parts of the Armenian community have been affiliated with the papacy since the Crusades. The Armenian Catholic Mekhitarist orders, located in Venice and Vienna, have played an important role in preserving Armenian culture and learning.

Architecture
In the arts the Armenians have exhibited their greatest originality in architecture, most notably in the fields of military and religious architecture. The Urarteans' architectural genius is clearly evidenced in the ruins of their fortresses, the excavated foundations of their palaces and temples, and their meticulously executed architectural models fashioned from metal. Just as the architecture of Urartu left its impact on Assyria, the architecture of Armenia and Armenian architects in Italy, in the Byzantine empire, and in the Balkans have had an impressive influence on Western church architecture.

Armenian church structures are usually modest in dimension, simple and compact, almost primitive in appearance, but strikingly original in design, if somewhat exotic in their external ornamental reliefs, decorative sculpture, and repeated blind arches. Even Armenian cathedrals are comparatively small in size. The churches are invariably constructed of native stone carefully cut and skillfully fitted together by local artisans. Isolated from the mainstream of Byzantine and Western cultural and art forms, Armenian architects were left largely to their own devices in designing and building their churches. According to some architectural historians, Armenian architects were responsible for the invention of the vaulted stone dome, which is usually mounted on a central floor plan, a triapsidal plan, a cruciform, or a quatrefoil.

The oldest surviving church in Armenia is the cathedral of Etchmiadzin, allegedly constructed by King Tiridates and Gregory the Illuminator in the early 4th century. Its original wooden dome was later redone in stone, and the entire church has since been restored and enlarged. The most original period in Armenian church architecture and the most productive was the 7th century, when the definitive contours of Armenian church art were established and the Armenian dome assumed its characteristic inverted conical shape. The more notable churches of this period include St. Hripsimé (618) and St. Gayané (630), both located in Vagarshapat in Soviet Armenia; the old church of Ani (622); the cathedral of Bagaran (631); the cathedral of Mran (635–640); the Church of Our Lady of Masters (650); the Church of St. Stepanos at Maghart; the Lady of Talin Church (690); and the cathedral of Zwartnots (641–666), an extraordinary triple-tiered structure, whose sculptured capitals with their motifs of eagles, grapes, leaves, and pomegranates lie in ruins in the middle of an arid wasteland.

Church construction was sporadic during the 8th and 9th centuries, but beginning in the 10th century Armenia experienced a cultural renaissance that produced a sudden flowering of churches and cathedrals in the various petty principalities and kingdoms of the time. In the Bagratid and Ardzruni kingdoms, in particular, many striking churches and cathedrals were erected, including the metropolitan church of Ani and the famous church on the island of Aghtamar, still visible from the shores of Lake Van. Simply but elegantly adorned with external sculptured reliefs and intricately carved scrollwork framing its arches, Aghtamar represents the crowning achievement of the period. Churches continued to be erected in abundance until the first half of the 13th century. However, all culture and art were arrested in Armenia with the coming of the Mongols and Tatars in the 14th century.

Painting
Armenian painting, both monumental and miniature, dates from at least the 6th century A.D. While the earliest dated illuminated manuscript is the Lazareff Gospel (887), at least four miniatures dating from the 6th century are preserved in the manuscript depository (Matenadaran) at Yerevan. Armenian pictorial art finds its most vivid expression in the illuminated manuscripts and miniatures of the Middle Ages. Monumental painting, most of which has been destroyed, was restricted mainly to church interiors and was probably not very extensively employed. But a series of photographs of the wall paintings of Aghtamar reveals a previously hidden originality in Armenian church murals.

Armenian illuminations and miniatures, many examples of which have survived intact, are without peer in Byzantine art, and their quality equals that of the finest miniatures of Western medieval art at comparable periods of development. The Gospel of Etchmiadzin (989) has a primitive but luminous simplicity. More elaborate are the gospels and lectionaries of the Cilician miniaturists, Thoros Roslin and Sarkis Pidzak.

Although Armenian miniature art clearly shows its aesthetic debt to Byzantine and Syriac art, it was influenced only peripherally by Persian and Islamic art forms. Sasanid influences, however, are clearly discernible in the complicated geometric ornamentation and floral motifs sometimes employed by the Armenian masters for marginal decoration or to frame their depiction of biblical figures and scenes.

Music
Armenian music, both secular and religious, is mainly of local significance. The ecclesiastical music is influenced largely by Greek sacred hymns and chants, and the secular is stamped with the Arabic imprint. Modern Armenian music has been equally lacking in distinction and originality, with the spectacular exception of the work of the Soviet Armenian composer Aram Khachaturian. Other modern Armenian composers of note are Aleksandr A. Spendiarov and the Armeno-Georgian Vano Muradeli, in the former Soviet Union, and the Armenian American Alan Hovhaness.

Literature
Literature in the Armenian language dates from the 5th century A.D., but an oral tradition existed before the invention of the alphabet. There is much evidence to suggest the existence of Armenian writers, historians, and poets at the Armenian court who wrote in Greek.

The earliest Armenian historian to write in Armenian was Moses of Khoren (Movses Khorenatzi), known as the "Armenian Herodotus," whose 5th-century history of Armenia is the prime source of information concerning the epics, legends, and folklore of ancient Armenia and the indispensable source of data on early Armenian history. Other notable historians of ancient and medieval Armenia are Ghazar Parbetsi (about 500 A.D.); Thomas Ardzruni (10th century); Matthew of Edessa, the passionate and partisan chronicler of Armenia during the Crusades; and Stephanos Orbelian (1258–1305), who recorded the depredations of the Mongols and Tatars.

Alongside Armenian history, there is the epic tradition, in which Western and Eastern forms have been intricately fused. Rich, passionate, and nationalistic, but at the same time marked by restraint and lucidity, Armenian epic poetry is unencumbered with the sensuality and abstruseness that typify much of Eastern epic art. It was strongly influenced by Muslim popular poetry, particularly in form, although the content is conspicuously individualistic, Christian, and national. Love songs, lullabies, satirical couplets, prayers, hymns, rhymed stories, heroic ballads glorifying Armenia's folk and national heroes, and lamentations depicting Armenia's grief and misery are some of the rich forms of the Armenian oral tradition. The most famous Armenian epic is Sassountsi Tavituh ("David of Sassoun"), which tells of the great hero who tamed lions and tigers, slew tyrants, and delivered his people from oppression.

Armenian popular poetry was of two types, both sung by wandering troubadours. The first consisted of poems composed spontaneously and sung by professional minstrels, who often improvised on their own artistic creations. The second type consisted of more formal compositions, conveying considerable feeling and passion.

Modern Armenian literature is essentially the literature of Armenians abroad, since the cultural centers of Armenia itself had largely vanished after the 14th century. In Russia and T'bilisi, Russian and German influences were dominant in the development of Armenian writing, while Armenian authors in Constantinople, Smyrna, Venice, and Vienna were influenced by French, Italian, and Greek forms and styles.

The first Armenian novelist was Khatchatour Abovyan (1805–1848), whose novel Verk‘ Hayastani (1858; "Wounds of Armenia: The Lamentations of a Patriot") clearly shows his Russo-German training at the University of Dorpat. Perhaps the most popular and outstanding writer was the nationalistic author Hagop Melik-Agopian (1835–1888), known as "Raffi," whose patriotically charged novels include Davit ‘Bek (1882; "David Beg"), Samvel (1886; "Samuel"), and Kaydser (1883–1887); "Sparks"). These works enjoyed wide acclaim and served to infuse the revolutionary mood of the late 19th century with the romanticized heroism of Armenia's vanquished feudal aristocracy. While Abovian had always been persona grata with the Soviet regime, Raffi, because of his blatant "bourgeois" nationalistic symbolism, was frowned upon until after the death of Stalin.

The first poet to write lyrics in modern Armenian was Bedros Tourian (1851–1872). Missak Medzarentz (1886–1980) has been compared to Verlaine for his verbal eloquence. Vahan Derian (1885–1920) produced more sensual and political lyrics. It must be remembered that the Armenian massacres of 1896 and 1915 exterminated almost all Armenian writers. In Armenia poetry has always been at the center of literature; poets were honored as moral leaders and seers. Both "Sciamanto" (Adom Yarjanian, 1878–1915) and "Daniel Varoujan" (Daniel Cheboukiarian, 1884–1915) were poets, teachers, and political leaders who wrote of the people's misery. "Varoujan" is generally considered to be the greatest Armenian poet of the last thousand years; his third book, Hetanos erker(1912: "Pagan Songs"), re-created pagan myths for the present, while his fourth (posthumous) book, Hasteen erkuh (1921; "The Song of Bread")—written during his last days in prison—sings of the simple sunlit glory of village life. Although Armenian poetry revolves around the holocaust, the best-known novel on the holocaust is the Austrian Franz Werfel's Die vierzig Tage des Musa Dagh (1933; "The Forty Days of Musa Dagh").

After the fall of the 1918 Armenian Republic to the Russian army in 1920, Armenian writers gathered in Paris, where surrealism was in vogue. Gosdan Zarain (1885–1969) took a Jungian approach to analyse peasant culture. Shahan Shanour (1903–1974) wrote novels and memoirs in Armenian, but gained some fame as a French poet. The French-educated Kostan Zaryn (1885–1969) wrote in a wide variety of genres, though he excelled in diarylike recollections, as in Antsorde ev ir Chamban (1926–1928; "The Traveller and His Road," 1981). Zabel Yessayen (1878–1943) dared to leave Paris and return to Armenia. She was accused of fostering nostalgia and was exiled to Siberia. Vahan Tekeyan (1878–1945) escaped the holocaust because he was outside of Armenia in 1915. He was a mystic visionary, an apocalyptic poet cursed with a sense of humour, who settled in Egypt as an editor; he spent his private moments sharpening sonnets.

Beirut became another locus for Armenian exiles. The critic Nigol Aghbalian (1873–1947) and the playwright Levont Shant (1869–1951) settled there. Shant's Ibsenesque plays are still performed today. In Beirut younger poets began experimenting with modern forms and techniques, but the strife in Lebanon has hindered their work. "Zareh" (Zareh Yaldizciyan, b. 1924) leads a group of poets in Istanbul.

Despite the imposition of Socialist Realism by Soviet authorities, some good prose writers, such as Kourken Mahari (1903–1969), Mgrditch Armen (1906–1972), and Axel Bagounts (1899–1937), were published; Mahari, Armen, and Bagounts, however, were all exiled to Siberia. The same fate overtook Vahan Totovents (1894–1938), who had graduated from the University of Wisconsin; he is famed for an exuberant autobiographical novel, Kyankuh heen hromeakan janabarheen vra (1930; "Scenes from an Armenian Childhood"), that celebrates his native city, Kharpert. In the United States, an emigré monthly, Hayrenik' ("Armenian Monthly"), published many important writers.

There is a new generation of talented poets who, if translated from Armenian, will allow Armenia to take a more significant place in world literature. By 1980 more than 160 variants of the four main "branches" of the Armenian national epics had been recorded and transcribed, about half of which have been published. The Russian writer Andrei Bitov published (in English) a vivid portrait of Armenia before the recent conflicts, A Captive of the Caucasus (1989).

Vernon V.Aspaturian,
Pennsylvania State University
How to cite this article:
MLA (Modern Language Association) style:
Aspaturian, Vernon V.. "Armenia." Scholastic Grolier Online, go.scholastic.com/content/schgo/L/article/002/128/0021280-00.html. Accessed 28 Jan. 2018.

Chicago Manual of Style:
Aspaturian, Vernon V.. "Armenia." Scholastic Grolier Online. https://go.scholastic.com/content/schgo/L/article/002/128/0021280-00.html (accessed January 28, 2018).

APA (American Psychological Association) style:
Aspaturian, V. (2018). Armenia. Retrieved January 28, 2018, from Scholastic Grolier Online. https://go.scholastic.com/content/schgo/L/article/002/128/0021280-00.html