hacking can help the world
	exposes the truth
		“If you tell the truth you do not need a good memory!”
		“Right is right, and wrong is wrong, and a body ain’t got no business doing wrong when he ain’t ignorant and knows better.”
		“I do not wish any reward but to know I have done the right thing.”

“It made me shiver. And I about made up my mind to pray, and see if I couldn't try to quit being the kind of a boy I was and be better. So I kneeled down. But the words wouldn't come. Why wouldn't they? It warn't no use to try and hide it from Him. Nor from ME, neither. I knowed very well why they wouldn't come. It was because my heart warn't right; it was because I warn't square; it was because I was playing double. I was letting ON to give up sin, but away inside of me I was holding on to the biggest one of all. I was trying to make my mouth SAY I would do the right thing and the clean thing, and go and write to that nigger's owner and tell where he was; but deep down in me I knowed it was a lie, and He knowed it. You can't pray a lie--I found that out. 

So I was full of trouble, full as I could be; and didn't know what to do. At last I had an idea; and I says, I'll go and write the letter--and then see if I can pray. Why, it was astonishing, the way I felt as light as a feather right straight off, and my troubles all gone. So I got a piece of paper and a pencil, all glad and excited, and set down and wrote:

Miss Watson, your runaway nigger Jim is down here two mile below Pikesville, and Mr. Phelps has got him and he will give him up for the reward if you send.

HUCK FINN.

I felt good and all washed clean of sin for the first time I had ever felt so in my life, and I knowed I could pray now. But I didn't do it straight off, but laid the paper down and set there thinking--thinking how good it was all this happened so, and how near I come to being lost and going to hell. And went on thinking. And got to thinking over our trip down the river; and I see Jim before me all the time: in the day and in the night-time, sometimes moonlight, sometimes storms, and we a-floating along, talking and singing and laughing. But somehow I couldn't seem to strike no places to harden me against him, but only the other kind. I'd see him standing my watch on top of his'n, 'stead of calling me, so I could go on sleeping; and see him how glad he was when I come back out of the fog; and when I come to him again in the swamp, up there where the feud was; and such-like times; and would always call me honey, and pet me and do everything he could think of for me, and how good he always was; and at last I struck the time I saved him by telling the men we had small-pox aboard, and he was so grateful, and said I was the best friend old Jim ever had in the world, and the ONLY one he's got now; and then I happened to look around and see that paper.

It was a close place. I took it up, and held it in my hand. I was a-trembling, because I'd got to decide, forever, betwixt two things, and I knowed it. I studied a minute, sort of holding my breath, and then says to myself:

"All right, then, I'll GO to hell"--and tore it up.”



Julian Assange is wikileaks exposing the truth. He has lived in exile at an Ecuadorian embassy in Great Britain in a room for years without the freedom to go outside. So at some point he had to make a decision like huckleberry finn, and said to himself "alright then, I'll go to hell." and chose to suffer for telling the truth and exposing the truth.

Here are issues that I had to deal with. I was in special ed at school, and I was being labeled as autistic, and so I never knew about that until I was in 8th grade, I also then began to notice that they were treating me differently compared to other students. So I started sending emails to the school and started protesting against it, they have asked me to stop so many times. But did I stop? Of course not. They were the ones getting it wrong. I then had to fight with my mom very hard to convince her that she needs to tell the school not to release any IEP documents to connections academy, I told her that if she did not do what I wanted her to do that it wasn't going to be pretty for her. So eventually one day, my mom decided to finally listen to me, she only sent the papers that say I WAS in IEP but am not anymore. So they are still on my record, and I have yet to fight for them to be removed from my record permanently.

So the second bigger issue that ties into all of this is that my parents went through a really bad divorce, and my mom always tried to cover up her wrong doings by lying, and trying really hard not to ever admit to them, so back in 2010 or so I always wanted to come in the room and see what was going on, I even tried to think of ways to spy on them, since I couldn't come in. In this case, my dad was the one thaat was right the whole time, I didn't notice that until around 2014. So for a long time I thought that it was my dad who started every fight, but in reality, it was my mom that was doing wrong things without me being aware of it, and she would constantly denying her wrong doings. So in May of 2014, I was able to attend IEP meetings for the first time. I didn't really know what was going on, but in April 2016 I figured it out, they were labeling me as autistic still. So around that time, I started to really want to know the truth, and hack my moms computer and see what she has to hide. I won't go into detail on what I found, but I found a lot of things that prove she had been lying. One thing that I can talk about, though, is that she had her own router, so I had my own router and my mom had another one she used for herself, and her wifi network name was hidden, but I knew the name of it, even though it was hidden. So then one day I try to hack her wifi, but it wasn't successful, so I moved on to another thing instead. I saw the wifi activity light blinking, which means there is data being sent or received across that connection. And what's fishy about that? The only computer that she had is the one she would use every day, and even then, her desktop used a wired connection, but only used wifi as a backup in case the wired connection fails. But even then, her desktop computer was off. So I started to think there were cameras in the house watching everything I did, as there was constant wifi activity, I would even stand there and watch it and it could be blinking for hours on end, when supposedly nothing was connected to wifi. Then in 2017 around September, I decided to hack my moms computer some more. And now since it is January of 2018, I found a lot of stuff, but I won't go into detail about what I found.