1. He regrets his involvement in the sudden turn of events (D)
2. Carefree days of happy childhood (B)
3. energetic (C)
4. irony (C)
5. him (B)
6. me (B)
7. its (B)
8. theirs (A)
9. I (B)
10. Symbols generally have only one meaning. (B)
11. alliterative language (D) [scheduled to be updated, answer may be subject to change]
question for number 11: "All of the following can be used by writers to foreshadow events in a story except"
12. C
13. B
14. E
15. D
16. A

17. Respond in 3-5 complete sentences. page 398-406 reading the world

The title "Another Evening at the Club" is close in meaning to "Just Another Evening at the Club." Given the events of the story, what is the significance of this meaning?

The significance would be that this is a daily interaction as common as going out to dinner or doing schoolwork. It just shows that the value system of the rich and powerful in a society that is very class driven and that a ring or even just saving face on a mistake is worth more than someones life. Someone being tortured is okay if it allows the rich or powerful to avoid admitting being wrong.


18. Respond in 3-5 complete sentences. page 437-449 reading the world

What is the most important lesson that the narrator of "The Women's Baths" learns in the story?

She learned at the end that the public baths weren't for just taking a bath. They were important for her grandmother's dignity and self-worth. The baths were something she enjoyed and where she experienced importance and independence. Also, the respect and kindness that her grandmother experienced is very refreshing and rejuvenating.


19. Respond in a paragraph, and make sure your answer is written in complete sentences. page 420-434 reading the world

"The Swimming Contest" ends with the word losers. What do you think the author the author means for readers to understand by this? What was "lost"?

It seems like peace is what was lost. The narrator starts off with a peaceful story of the swimming pool where his mother introduced him to an old lady who told him "those who want peace will live in peace." He seems to gravitate toward this peace and try to relive it by setting up experiences for himself of similar smells and tastes and sounds. He realizes when Abdul-Karim dies that his peaceful memories of the house in the orange grove died also and were now lost to him. Abdul-Karim also took with him the oppurtunity to beat him in a swimming contest and I think symbolically this represents the lost opportunities that war brings with its death and destruction.


20. Respond in a well-organized essay, and make sure your answer is written in complete sentences.

Respond to one of the questions below. Include at least two supporting details or examples.

A. In “The Literature of the Middle East and South Asia,” Laura Winkiel writes: “These stories help us to understand the complex questions that Middle Easterners and South Asian people ask as they stand at a crossroads of cultural and religious change.” Explain how this statement applies to one of the selections you read. Be sure to include the title of the selection and explain the crossroads that it illustrates.


Laura is presuming that the Middle East and South Asia are standing at a crossroad of cultural and religious change. These cultures and religions have endured thousands of years of people wanting them to change and any attempts to force any change. Many wars have been fought either defending or persecuting cultures or religions in these areas. In the story Cranes two men who are boyhood friends and now caught up on opposite sides of a war are changing their religions or cultures. 

In the Armenia poem we can see that language and literature is something that preserves cultural and religious beliefs. These cultures and religious beliefs are preserved even when a people is in exile or have their lands taken away. 

There may be a crossroad but that doesn't mean that it is a dead end for a particular culture or religion because crossroads doesn't equal change. 

Even though 2 people or even a thousand people may choose a different path on the crossroads the roads themselves for any particular culture or religion continue to exist because the crossroad is less important to people who are living their lives than it is to people who want to intellectualize the age old idea that a religion can change or a culture can change in their lifetime. 

When these ideals are much larger and more powerful than any person who is going to be standing out the crossroads. Laura can name any religion or any culture and say it's going to cease to exist in it's current form, and 90% of people who adhere to those sets of beliefs will continue to adhere to those sets of beliefs. 