Aztec Life

During the 14th–16th centuries, the Aztec Empire was located in the area that is today southern Mexico. The Aztecs called themselves the Mexica. They were polytheistic, meaning that they believed in many gods. They told stories based upon their religious beliefs. Some of these still exist as Aztec mythological literature. Sacrifice was an important part of Aztec religion. It was through sacrifice, they believed, that the world could exist in the first place and that life could continue.

Now, you will read articles that present a brief history of the Aztec people and a look at how they have influenced Latin American life.

The term "Latin America" refers to Mexico and all countries and political units in Central and South America. The area includes 33 independent nations, along with French Guiana and some island possessions of the United States, Great Britain, France, and the Netherlands. Landforms, climate, and lifestyles in Latin America vary greatly. But common experience and historical developments unite its peoples in many ways.

Latin America is a region of extreme contrasts. It is characterized by the magnificent high Andes mountains and the massive Amazon River. There are lush rain forests in the Amazon Basin, while Chile's Atacama Desert is considered the driest area in the world.

Latin America is both rich and poor. Natural resources are many and varied, but they are unevenly distributed. The region is a major exporter of bauxite, iron ore, copper, and lead, for example. But it has very little coal, and only five or six nations are self-sufficient in petroleum. Much of the world's coffee, bananas, and sugarcane is produced there, but basic foodstuffs like wheat must be imported. Latin America contains the oldest universities in the Western Hemisphere, but many of its people today cannot read or write. Regional incomes are near the world average but are far below those of the more industrialized nations. Rapid population growth and increasing urbanization have created many demands that are difficult to meet.

Origin of the Name
The name "Latin America" was first used in the early 1800's to differentiate American countries with populations of southern European (Latin) origin from those of northern European origin. For this reason the English-speaking nations in the area—and the overseas possessions of the United States, Great Britain, France, and the Netherlands—are sometimes not considered part of Latin America.

But there was another reason for the use of the term. The first republic in the world was the ancient Roman republic of the Latins. This Latin republic—its laws, its organization, even its architecture—served as an inspiration to the Latin Americans in their struggle for independence. To this day the legal systems of many of the Latin American republics are based on Roman law.

People
The people of Latin America are as varied as the landscape in which they live. The major groups are Indians, whites, blacks, mestizos (people of both Indian and white ancestry), and mulattoes (people of both black and white ancestry).

Indians—Latin America's first inhabitants—settled in Latin America thousands of years before the European explorer Christopher Columbus claimed the New World for Spain in 1492. The world's earliest known settlement, in Monte Verde, Chile, was established about 12,000 years ago. Great Indian civilizations—the Aztecs, Maya, Chibchas, and Incas—later developed on the plateaus and high mountain valleys in Mexico, Guatemala, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, and Bolivia. In the West Indies and in the coastal plains and rain forests of South America, the Indian population was smaller, more scattered, and less developed culturally.

Today Indian populations differ from place to place. Few Indians have lived in Uruguay since the European conquest. Fewer than 1 percent of the people of Costa Rica and Argentina are Indian. But in Guatemala, Peru, Bolivia, and Ecuador, nearly 50 percent of the people are Indian. A strong presence is also evident in Mexico.

Soon after Columbus discovered the Americas while searching for a sea route to Asia, the Spanish and Portuguese sent soldiers, known as conquistadores, to conquer the native peoples and establish colonies. With their superior weapons and firepower, the Europeans soon established dominance throughout the region.

Until the 1800's, white people of European ancestry who were born in Latin America called themselves criollos, meaning "wellborn." The criollos felt more attached to the countries from which their ancestors came than they did to their own place of birth. Their homes, dress, food, and customs were modeled after those of their mother countries, and many sent their children to school in Europe. But in the 1800's, the Latin American republics gained their independence from Spain and Portugal, and the criollos assumed leadership. At that time, most criollos established a new loyalty to their American homeland. Today, the term criollo has little significance, except perhaps in Ecuador and Colombia, where a tradition of a colonial aristocracy has been maintained.

In the 1900's, foreigners from other lands immigrated to Latin America, particularly to Argentina, Costa Rica, Chile, and Uruguay. Italians and Germans arrived at the turn of the century, and many Chinese and Japanese after 1945, at the end of World War II.

Mestizos make up the largest segment of the populations of Mexico; the Central American republics of El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua, and Panama; and the South American republics of Colombia, Venezuela, Chile, and Paraguay. They also make up the largest element in Latin America's growing middle-income group. Many mestizos are lawyers, political leaders, business people, teachers, doctors, scientists, and artists.

Africans were brought to Latin America as early as the 1500's and as late as the mid-1800's. They worked as slaves on plantations in the West Indies of the Caribbean, in the coastal lowlands of Central America, in Brazil, and on the northeastern coast of South America. Some became legally free. But like the Indians, they were subject to harsh social and economic inequalities. Haitians are mainly of African ancestry. Blacks and mulattoes also make up significant portions of the populations of Cuba, Barbados, Puerto Rico, the Dominican Republic, Panama, Jamaica, Trinidad and Tobago, Guyana, Suriname, French Guiana, and Brazil.

Language
Latin America's languages are as varied as its ethnic groups. Spanish and Portuguese are the major languages, but many others are also spoken.

Spanish and Portuguese. Nearly two-thirds of the people of Latin America speak Spanish, and about one-third speak Portuguese. The Spanish once ruled more than half of the now-independent countries of Latin America, while Portugal held power in Brazil, the single largest country. Language is therefore one of the cultural elements many Latin Americans have in common. A Puerto Rican poet or an Argentinian novelist can be read by a Panamanian, a Honduran, or a Mexican.
An Argentinian or a Peruvian can understand the Spanish of a Spaniard. A Brazilian can understand a native Portuguese. But Spanish and Portuguese as spoken in Latin America differ somewhat in speech pattern, rhythm, and accent from the languages spoken in Spain and Portugal. These differences are much like those among English-speaking people from the United States and Great Britain or Australia.

Other Languages. Millions of people of Indian ancestry speak their own traditional languages as well as their country's official language. Several countries with large Indian populations take pride in remembering and maintaining their Indian heritage. The most important example of this is in Paraguay, which is effectively bilingual, using both Guaraní and Spanish. Peru is also bilingual: Quechua as well as Spanish is taught in the schools. The most widely spoken Indian languages are Nahuatl, Mixtec, Tarascan, and Zapotec (in Mexico); Aymará (in Bolivia and Peru); Guaraní (in Paraguay); Maya (in Mexico and Guatemala); and Quechua (in Peru and Ecuador).
Many of the Indians in Mexico, Guatemala, Bolivia, Peru, and Ecuador do not read or write Spanish, but most speak and understand it. However, because a common written and spoken language is necessary to unify a modern nation, great efforts are being made in the schools to teach people how to communicate in their nation's official language.

English is the most important of Latin America's other languages. It is the official language of Belize and Guyana, as well as of a number of the Caribbean islands, such as Trinidad and Tobago, Jamaica, Dominica, Grenada, and Barbados. It is also a major second language throughout Latin America.

French is the official language of Haiti, French Guiana, and the Caribbean islands of Martinique and Guadeloupe. The French spoken in Haiti, known as Creole, differs considerably from the language spoken in France. Blacks have added words and even elements of grammar of their own. Dutch is the official language of Suriname and is spoken on such Caribbean islands as Aruba and Curaçao.

Many other ethnic groups can be found in Latin America, chiefly in urban centers. Many of them—such as the Chinese, Japanese, Germans, Italians, and Arabs—still speak their ancestral language while at home.

Many words for foods, everyday things, and customs in Latin America come from Indian or African languages. "Chocolate," for example, comes from the ancient Aztec word chocolatl.

The Spanish, Portuguese, and French languages spoken in Latin America contain many new words that originated in America. Words that mean the same thing may differ from country to country. A Chilean says huaso for "cowboy," but an Argentinian says gaucho; a Costa Rican, sabanero; a Colombian, llanero; and a Brazilian, both gaucho and vaquero. A Bolivian and a Peruvian say oriente ("east") when speaking of the frontier or last-settled part of a country, but a Cuban speaks of la manigua ("the bush"). A public bus is called a guagua in many parts of the Spanish Caribbean. But camión and autobus are common elsewhere in Latin America. A Venezuelan says cambur when speaking of a banana, but a Mexican says plátano.

Land
Latin America's land is highly variable. Highlands include the Andes mountains, which run up the Pacific coast of South America. Mount Aconcagua, in the Argentine Andes, is the highest point in the Western Hemisphere (22,834 feet, or 6,960 meters). The Brazilian highlands dominate much of the eastern half of South America. The Amazon rain forest in the center of South America is the largest rain forest in the world. The Amazon, the second-longest river in the world, originates in the Peruvian Andes. Its drainage basin, a wide lowland valley, is the largest in the world.

Climate
Much of Latin America's climate is tropical. Some of the tropics, such as the Amazon basin, are hot and wet year-round. The north and east coasts of Central America and the Caribbean islands also have high temperatures and abundant rain. Other tropical areas, such as the Brazilian highlands, have dry seasons. Arid or semi-arid areas include northern Mexico and the southern tip of South America. Chile's Atacama Desert is one of the driest places in the world. Many of the cold peaks of the Andes are capped with snow.

Animal and Plant Life
Latin America has an abundance of plant and animal life, some of which is found nowhere else on Earth. The Amazon rain forest itself is home to more plants and animals than any other place in the world.

Llamas, vicuñas (relatives of llamas), and the Andean condor live high in the Andes. Armored armadillos and deadly anacondas inhabit the Amazon forest. Brilliantly colored macaws fly about the region's forests and grasslands. Equally colorful poison dart frogs are found in the tropical rain forests. Sharp-toothed piranhas swim in warm, sluggish tropical waters. The Galapagos Islands off the coast of Ecuador are home to giant land tortoises.

Latin America's vegetation ranges from grasses and scrub brushes on plateaus to towering, broad-leafed hardwood trees in the rain forests. These trees often support masses of vines and creepers. The region is also known for its exotic orchids.

Religion
Many of the world's religions are practiced in Latin America. But most Latin Americans are Roman Catholic. The Spanish and Portuguese conquistadores, who were devout Roman Catholics, converted many Indians to their faith. Today in countries with large Indian populations, such as Mexico, Guatemala, Bolivia, and Peru, religious practices reflect a heavy mingling of Indian and Catholic traditions. Local saints' days and celebrations of miracles are included in the calendar of regular church observances. Religious and civic holidays often contain combined elements of ancient Indian and Catholic religions.

Africans brought their religious traditions to Latin America and combined them with Christian beliefs and practices. Many blacks and mulattoes in rural Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Haiti, and Brazil practice Catholicism, which has been modified greatly by the belief systems of African-based religions. These include candomblé (in Brazil), Santería (in Cuba and Puerto Rico), and voodoo (in Haiti).

Curaçao, a possession of the Netherlands, has the oldest Jewish synagogue in the New World. Buenos Aires, Mexico City, and Rio de Janeiro also have significant Jewish communities. There are Hindus and Muslims in Trinidad and in Guyana. Many people in Argentina and Brazil practice Shinto and Buddhism, the major religions of Japan and China. Protestant minorities exist in every country, and in some, such as Guatemala, they are fast becoming the majority.

Way of Life
Traditionally, Latin Americans are early risers. Around seven o'clock, they have a breakfast of coffee and milk, hot chocolate with buns, or, in Central America and Mexico, tortillas and beans. If they can afford it, they have eggs and bacon. They work until noon or one o'clock, when they go home to eat the big meal of the day. After the meal, many people take a siesta, or afternoon nap. It is still common for many shops and businesses, as well as farms, to stop work for two or three hours in the middle of the day. Intense heat and high altitudes make this habit necessary and desirable. This results in a work day that begins earlier and ends later than it does in the United States.

In many regions, however, the traditional siesta is disappearing. Many urban businesses are changing to lunch breaks of an hour or less. As working hours change, so does the character of the midday meal. At six or seven o'clock, the Latin American eats a snack called a merienda. Dinner is eaten quite late in Latin America—nine o'clock or even later.

A large part of Latin America remains rural and agricultural. Many Latin Americans live in villages that are shut in by great mountains or rivers. These people are likely to be Indians whose way of life is strongly influenced by that of their ancestors. But the huge migration of large numbers of people—particularly young people—from rural to urban areas is an important recent trend.

As cities have grown larger, the differences between rural and urban ways of life have begun to disappear. The construction of highways and roads connecting cities and the countryside has increased travel and interaction. Better communication systems also help to bridge distances. Transistor radios, cell phones, and satellite television are now found even in the most rural areas and serve better than the written word to spread information and ideas.

Rural Life. In the rural areas, the materials and methods of building a home have changed little over the centuries. The rural home normally contains one or two rooms and is made of available materials—logs, boards, or adobe.
Many things used in Latin American homes go back to pre-Columbian days (the era before Columbus discovered the New World). The petate, a straw mat common in Latin America, is a bed which the Latin American peasant uses throughout his or her life. (The well-to-do Latin American uses a handwoven petate as a floor or wall decoration.) Every rural home has a hearth, or a brasero or fogón. This is an iron stand or a raised stone platform on which charcoal or wood is burned for cooking. Rural homes in Mexico and parts of Central America still use a three-legged stone mortar (metate) to grind corn. Smaller mortars are used for mashing vegetables and spices.

City Life. Latin America has more than 30 cities with populations exceeding 1 million. Mexico City, São Paulo, Rio de Janeiro, Santiago, Lima, Buenos Aires, Caracas, and Bogotá are the largest.
New World cities are laid out typically in simple, straight lines radiating from a central square, called a plaza. Surrounding the plaza are buildings that give form and authority to the city. On one side is the church. On another are the government buildings. Homes of the wealthy and important businesses may occupy the rest of the plaza. Most plazas have covered arcades for the convenience of shoppers. The main plaza usually contains a covered bandstand where music is played several times a week. Monasteries, convent schools, hospitals, and private homes are built on the streets leading away from the square.

The average city home is chiefly Spanish in origin. Thick stone or adobe walls insulate from the heat or cold. A central patio is a common feature, and the front door usually opens directly to the street. The patio is the center of the home. There the children play, household tasks are performed, and family and friends sit and talk. Plants and birdcages often decorate the patio. The kitchen, bedrooms, and living room open onto the central patio to receive the maximum amount of air and sunshine. The Latin American home, no matter how modest, combines the outdoors and the indoors.

Homes of the wealthy are more elaborate and have all the newest conveniences of modern living. A typical home has a doorway that leads into an open hall. This hall, in turn, leads onto the patio, which is bounded on all sides by columns and arches. Sometimes there is a second patio, used as an orchard and for the servants' quarters. Ceilings in bedrooms are high. Walls are usually painted white, but doorways and floors are often decorated with colored tiles. Balconies and gates are made of wrought iron. The modern Latin American home may use new materials—glass, marble, brick, concrete, and steel. But its design still mirrors the pattern of the colonial home.

People with low incomes sometimes live near the city center in a type of apartment house called a vecindad (tenement). These houses are often two stories high, with a long patio. Families live around the patio. Sometimes four or five people occupy one room. Clotheslines and washing and bathing facilities, all found on the patio, are used in common by all residents.

The poorest people live in squatter settlements found on the outskirts of the cities. Here the people live in shanties and the streets are not paved. There are no sewers, and there is little running water. The slums have various Spanish names, including barriadas, miserias, and callampas. In Portuguese they are called favelas. These sections contrast with the beauty and wealth of colonial houses, modern mansions, and hotels. Most countries have attempted some forms of urban slum clearance. But recent community efforts to improve shantytowns have been recognized. Social organization, neighborhood pride, and self-help projects can often transform shantytowns into more livable communities.

Food and Drink. The food of the average Latin American is simple, robust, and appetizing. Often, but not always, it is highly spiced with hot peppers. Hot sauce is usually found on the table. The staple foods are rice, beans, eggs, beef, pork, lamb, fish, and squash and other vegetables. Corn (maize), avocados, potatoes, cassava (a starchy root), tomatoes, cocoa, and many varieties of nuts and fruits are just some of the foods native to Latin America. The plantain, a large cooking banana, is as widely eaten in the Caribbean as corn is in Mexico and Central America or as potatoes are in South America. Fruit is abundant. Some kinds are known only in tropical Latin America. Mangoes, breadfruit, and papayas are among the many fruits eaten in tropical regions.
Each country has developed its own national dishes. Argentina is noted for fine steaks. Chile is known for its empanadas, or flour dumplings filled with fish or meat, olives, and spices. In Venezuela, corn dumplings stuffed with meat and fish are called hallacas. Mole, a meat dish in a spicy sauce made with chiles and often chocolate, is popular in Mexico. Cebiche is a fine Peruvian fish platter, and the llapingachos of Ecuador are potatoes stuffed with cream cheese and eggs. Brazil's national dish is feijoada, black beans cooked with various meats and served with rice and a mixture of cassava, oranges, and other fruit. Soups and desserts are equally varied. The type of cooking varies, depending on local resources. The tequila of Mexico (a strong drink distilled from a variety of the century plant), the aguardiente of Colombia and Ecuador, the tiste of Bolivia, and the wines of Chile are among the national drinks. Maté, a tea-like beverage, is also popular throughout Latin America.

Dress. Modern dress is common throughout Latin America. People in towns and cities dress the same way as city people in Europe or the United States. The business world is particularly formal. But in a great many regions of Latin America, garments of Indian style and design are still worn. Traditional folk dress is ornamented and brightly colored but dignified and tasteful. The huipil, worn by the Indian women of Mexico and Guatemala, is made of two long pieces of cloth sewn together, with an opening for the head. This garment is worn over the shoulders like a cape. Short trousers and embroidered shirts tied at the waist are worn by the Indians in southern Mexico and Guatemala.
Every country has its distinctive regional dress. The man's straw hat, varied in size and shape, is seen everywhere in tropical Latin America. Woolen caps for the men and derby hats for the women are commonly worn by the Indians in the cold, windswept Andes of Bolivia and Peru. Jewelry varies from modest strings of colored beads, shells, and coral to elaborate silver and gold earrings and bracelets.

Sports. Soccer is the national sport of most countries. But basketball, baseball, boxing, rugby, and tennis have become increasingly popular. Bullfights are enjoyed in Mexico, Central America, and most of Andean South America.
Holidays. Each country has its own holidays to celebrate—independence day, the birth or death of a national hero, or the anniversary of an event in the nation's history. But most of Latin America's holidays are religious in nature. Every village, town, and city has its patron saint. Religious pilgrimages, folk dances, songs, and fireworks are familiar ways of celebration. New Year's Day, Carnival, Easter Sunday, All Souls' Day, and Christmas are some of the major holidays observed by most Latin Americans.
Carnival, or Mardi Gras, is a celebration introduced by the Spanish and Portuguese. People wearing masks and elaborate costumes parade through the streets. Festive parties are held in most homes. Carnival is a burst of joy and freedom before Lent, a 40-day period of self-denial practiced by most Christians. The carnivals of Trinidad and Tobago, Haiti, and Brazil in particular are internationally famous.

Easter Sunday is a high point in religious celebration. The day may begin with the burning of a papier-mâché Judas in the streets. It may close with an evening stroll in the plaza as a band plays. Young men break colored eggshells filled with confetti or perfume and shower the contents on young women as they stroll in opposite directions around the square.

All Souls' Day is observed by visits to cemeteries. People bring flowers, foods, and pictures of the dead. In some places there are all-night vigils and prayers. Respect for the dead makes this one of Latin America's most solemn days.

Christmas is observed, with slight variations, throughout Latin America. In Brazil, dancing and carols often precede midnight mass. In Costa Rican homes, an entire room is set aside for a nativity scene. In Chile, thousands of people gather at the little town of Andacollo to pay homage to the Virgin Mary. Many Colombians put up Christmas trees.

Nowhere does Christmastime last longer or have more magic than in Mexico. There the season, called La Posada, begins on December 16. Each night, families and their guests act out Mary and Joseph's search for lodging. There are prayers and songs. Candies, fruits, other food, and punch are available for all.

The children enjoy breaking a piñata each evening. The piñata is a clay pot covered with papier-mâché and colored tissue paper and filled with candies, fruits, and coins. It may take one of many shapes, such as a head of lettuce, a donkey, a fish, a ship, or a stork. When it is broken, children scramble for the contents. It is the cheerful end to each evening from December 16 through December 24 (Christmas Eve), when the family attends midnight Mass.

Santa Claus, a relatively recent figure in Latin American celebrations, has been received enthusiastically. Gifts may also be received on January 6, celebrating the visit of the three Magi (kings) to the infant Jesus. Children may leave a bundle of hay or a pot of water for the Magi's camels.

Customs and Traditions. Throughout Latin America, the extended family is held dear. Loyalty and responsibility to one's family is extremely important. Parents teach their children obedience and respect for authority. Piety, gallantry, and courtesy are also carefully cultivated in the Latin American child. These qualities are also emphasized in courtship. Customs are rapidly changing. But prior to marriage, couples are typically chaperoned.
In Latin America, a girl does not lose her own family name when she marries. If Cecilia López marries Juan Díaz, she becomes Cecilia López de (of) Díaz. Her family name also lives on in her children. Her son Pablo, for example, would be known as Pablo Díaz López; her daughter Catalina, as Catalina Díaz López. All legal documents—baptismal records, school certificates, passports—bear in sequence the given name, father's family name, and mother's family name.

Catholic children—rich or poor, urban or rural—are baptized and named for the saint on whose day they were born. Frequently the names of other close members of the family are added, so that a child sometimes has five or six names.

In cities and in the country, the choice of a godfather and godmother (compadres) is of very great importance. Nothing brings two Catholic Latin Americans closer together than for one to be the godparent of the other's child. The child's religious upbringing, welfare, education, and even support are sometimes entrusted to the godparents. Baptism takes place in the church and is followed by a party. In the country, this party includes a feast, dances, and songs. In the city it is customary to dance to popular music and eat sandwiches and cakes.

Wedding ceremonies usually take place in church. But the preparations and the celebrations that follow a wedding vary from country to country, from religion to religion, and from region to region. A civil ceremony is considered as binding as a religious one. But most Catholic couples do not feel properly married without a church ceremony.

The status of women is improving throughout Latin America. Professional opportunities vary from country to country and group to group. But more women have careers in government, science, diplomacy, and business than ever before.

Cultural Heritage
In most Latin American countries, the Indians' contributions are old and many-sided. For this reason, some people prefer to call the region Indo-America. But this term is not entirely accurate. Costa Rica, Argentina, and Uruguay are largely European in origin. In most of the Caribbean, Brazil, Suriname, Guyana, and French Guiana, the African rather than the Indian has been the dominant influence on life and culture.

Latin Americans are fine artisans and still make many things by hand. Although mass-produced goods are now very common, unique handcrafted items can still be found. Latin American designs are original and colors are bold, so that the simplest dish has individual beauty. The pottery and ceramics of Latin America are unique and varied. Each region uses its own designs.

For more information on Latin American culture, see the articles Latin America, Art and Architecture of , Latin America, Literature of , and Latin America, Music of .

History and Government
An ever-changing mix of "protected" democracies (those that are controlled by the military) and dictatorships characterizes the political climate of Latin America. Many of the reasons for this constant political turmoil may be understood by examining the history of the region.

Colonial Times
The colonial history of Latin America is very different from the much shorter colonial periods of the United States and Canada. Three centuries of Spanish and Portuguese rule gave Latin Americans little experience in self-government.

In the Spanish and Portuguese colonies, the king was supreme. The Spanish king ruled through the Council of the Indies and through the viceroys (governors who represented the king in the colonies). The Portuguese king governed through the Transmarine Council. The members of both councils were appointed by their king and lived in Spain and Portugal. The councils issued laws, supervised the church, and regulated trade and trade routes.

This system of government meant that people born in the New World had little opportunity to govern themselves. A few criollos were appointed to the cabildos or senados da camara (town councils), as regidores (town councillors). The mestizos had even fewer social and political rights. They were even less prepared for self-government. The Indians who worked for the landowners and mine owners were treated like slaves. The blacks, who worked on the plantations, actually were slaves. Thus, only the criollos gained some experience in government.

In the 1800's, most Latin American countries revolted and became independent republics. It was not surprising that the wars for independence were led by criollos, like Simón Bolívar, José de San Martín, Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla, and Francisco de Miranda, or by exceptional mestizos, like José María Morelos y Pavón. Only Brazil made a peaceful transition from colony to independent monarchy and, later, from monarchy to republic.

The criollo group included the higher clergy, the wealthy landowners and mine owners, and the merchants. These leaders were overwhelmingly conservative and sought to maintain the social, economic, and political systems of the colonial period, but without the Spanish rulers. They firmly believed that the people were not ready for self-government due to lack of education, perceived racial inferiority, and great geographic barriers of mountains, jungles, and deserts.

Independence was followed by quarrels between liberals and conservatives. These two groups were divided on economic policy and on the question of the relationship between the government and the Roman Catholic Church. They also disagreed about whether the provinces or the federal government should exercise the greater power. The liberals opposed the Church's ownership of land and its control of education and marriage, but the conservatives supported the Church. The liberals opposed government control of the economy, but the conservatives (who usually controlled the government) favored governmental control of financial investments and tariffs. Finally, liberals wanted less centralization of government, while conservatives favored more centralization.

Coups d'état and dictatorships were common throughout the 1800's. Strong leaders, known as caudillos, ruled in many countries. To this day many Latin Americans tend to admire the strong individual who takes control of a nation. Most changes in government, however, have simply replaced the leaders at the top. They have usually had little effect on the common people.

Politics and Government Today
Unstable governments in modern times have often swung back and forth between civilian and military rule. Authoritarian governments, in which people have no control over the actions of their leaders, have been more common under the military. In some countries, military rulers brought about reforms and pushed for more social equality. By contrast, democratically elected presidents have sometimes behaved like dictators.

Today most nations in Latin America are multiparty democracies in which power changes hands in an orderly fashion. In some countries, however, although elections may be held and a civilian president installed, the real power remains with the leaders of the military. Reducing military control remains one of Latin America's greatest challenges.

A World of Change
Latin America is a region undergoing tremendous changes, challenges, and crises. As civilians struggle to establish genuine democracies, ongoing problems such as racial division and discrimination must be recognized and confronted. Another concern is the rapid population growth that is profoundly widening the gap between rich and poor. Most of the land and wealth is still controlled by an elite few. There are few jobs for those flocking to the cities in search of a better life. Too many people are still unable to read and write, and even more lack adequate housing and health care.

By 2002 there was growing dissatisfaction with the democratic and free-market economic reforms that had been adopted so enthusiastically in the 1990's. The new democratic governments were often weak and corrupt, and opening up the economy to private investment had not made life better for most of the poor. With 44 percent of Latin Americans still living in poverty, job layoffs and cutbacks in government programs for the poor led to widespread protests.

International Relations
Latin Americans are taking an increasingly active role in their own and world affairs. Belize and several island nations in the Caribbean became independent in the late 1970's and early 1980's. The United States transferred control of the Panama Canal to Panama on December 31, 1999.

All independent Latin American countries are members of the United Nations, and the Organization of American States (OAS) provides a forum for nations in the region to discuss their common concerns. The Central American Common Market (CACM) has been revived; the Common Market of the South (Mercosur) was founded in 1989; and the Andean Common Market was established in 1992. All trade barriers between Mexico, Colombia, and Venezuela ended in 1994. And by 2005, the Central American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) had been approved by the United States and Costa Rica, El Salvador, Honduras, Guatemala, Nicaragua, and the Dominican Republic.

In 2009, 12 South American nations established the Union of South American Nations (UNASUR). UNASUR integrates Mercosur and the Andean Common Market. The goal of the new organization is to unify its members' transportation, energy, and immigration policies. The pact will go into force when it is ratified by the legislatures of the member states: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Guyana, Paraguay, Peru, Suriname, Uruguay, and Venezuela.

Latin America continues to have many problems. These include a rapidly growing population, poverty, unemployment, and a shortage of educational facilities in many areas. But the area's various trade pacts have resulted in a dramatic increase in interregional trade. Latin Americans hoped the pacts would bring further economic growth and social progress.

That economic growth was evident during the first quarter of 2010. Some Latin American nations had weathered the 2008–09 global financial crisis better than had the United States and Europe. Brazil's economy, for example, grew 9 percent more than in the first quarter of 2009. Mexico's grew more than 4 percent. And in April, Peru's gross domestic product soared 9.3 percent. The economies of Bolivia and Chile also surged. The World Bank predicted that Latin America's economic growth in 2010 would be about 4.5 percent.




Elements of a Creation Story

A creation story, also known as a creation myth, is a story that explains or describes the beginning of a life, humanity, or universe. These stories will often include the exploits of a cultural hero or a god or gods that is or are worshipped by a culture. The hero or god in the story will have the values of the author of the story or the society that is represented by the character. 

Common elements of a creation story include the following:
The theme of birth – Birth can represent a new life or even the beginning of a society or universe.
A supreme being, god, or deity – This being or beings usually starts the events of the story that will create the new life, society, or universe.
Values represented by the author or culture – The hero or supreme being in a creation myth will represent the strong values of a culture, society, or person.


amends - compensation for an injury
penance - an act of self-punishment
precipice - a steep cliff
pustules - pimples
stole - a scarf
peons - servants
maize - corn


Practice Your Skills: Finding Common and Proper Nouns (p. 550)

Franz Joseph Haydn: P; Rohrau: P; Austria: P
“Papa” Haydn: P; composers: C; period: C
Mozart: P; Beethoven: P; Haydn’s: P; development: C; form: C
Haydn: P; Vienna: P; city: C; Austria: P
1762: P; Haydn: P; service: C; Prince Nikolaus: P; Haydn: P; composer: C
prince: C; Haydn: P; staff: C
schedule: C; performances: C; music: C; performances: C
occasions: C; Haydn: P; works: C
fame: C; Vienna: P; Europe: P
work: C; The Creation: P
Practice Your Skills: Finding Compound and Collective Nouns (p. 551)

Compound Nouns      Collective Nouns
			assembly
study hall		assembly
			team
heart attack		band
			audience
officeholders		class
			family
good-bye		staff
			group
classmates		crowd

Onlookers

ice cream



Connect to Writing: Editing

Capitalizing Proper Nouns (p. 550)
Mozart; Haydn; Vienna
Haydn; Beethoven
New Year’s Day; Haydn; England
Haydn; London; The London Symphonies
The Seasons
Connect to Writing: Editing

Spelling Compound Nouns (p. 552)
brother-in-law
baby-sitter
four-year-old
brother-in-law’s turtlenecks
first aid
Check Point: Mixed Practice (p. 552)

snowdrifts; Jim Maxwell; auction; day; December
group; horses; truck; slaughterhouse
Jim; Cassidy; horse; years; farm
horse; shape; ribs; mud; coat
Jim; dealer; dollars; family
children; Cassidy; affection; animal
cadness; Jim; months; neighbor; Dr. Mason Adams
Cassidy; idea; quarters
night; fence; field; gardens; yards; Jim
fences; Cassidy; Jim