Three Design Purposes

If you take a look at the jobs of interior, instructional, landscape, and graphic designers, it will be obvious that design has many different purposes. Not every type of designer is concerned with the same things. For example, landscape designers focus on aesthetics (visual appeal) and maybe functionality, while graphic designers have to consider communication as well. These are the three main purposes of design:
aesthetics,
communication
functionality
Aesthetics, Communication, and Functionality

Aesthetics is easy to understand; it refers to the visual appeal of a design. Communication and functionality, on the other hand, are sometimes confusing to distinguish. Communication refers to how well a design conveys its intended message; functionality refers to how well the design serves its overall purpose. Take a look at an example. Jesse loves his new alarm clock; it is sleek, black, and easily hooks up to his mp3 player so he can wake up to the song of his choice. The only thing that bothers him is that he can’t see the time in the middle of the night because the display screen doesn’t light up. This design serves two purposes quite well. Which purpose does this design fail to meet? Communication, that’s right!

Consider one more example. Jesse also has a new mp3 player. It has a glossy, black coat and is small enough to fit comfortably in his pocket. The display screen shows what song is playing, but Jesse is having problems getting new mp3s loaded. He can’t figure out how to correctly sync it up with his computer. It only seems to work half of the time. If there’s nothing wrong with the hardware, which purpose does this design fail to achieve? This design is visually appealing and communicates well, but it fails to function appropriately.
Objectives

Explain how context comes into play in design
Explain why it is important that designers prioritize their focus when working on a design
List and describe the three main purposes of design
Key Words

aesthetics
anthropometry
communication
context
functionality

