Equipped from the Ground Up

Just as you need to have the right boots for a long trek outdoors, you need to know how to use the math resources to be successful in this course. The following section describes the resources that you will encounter during your geometry adventure.

Core Building Blocks Skills Page

In math, many skills build on previous concepts that you may have learned. In the geometry course, each lesson begins with a review of a prerequisite skill that relates to the geometry lesson content. If you have trouble with a certain prerequisite skill, you can access resources that support that skill before you begin the lesson.

Teachlet® Tutorials

These interactive presentations allow you to engage in meaningful practice and receive immediate feedback. You can watch a Teachlet tutorial as many times as needed. Don’t hesitate to take notes on the topics covered in the Teachlet tutorials for future reference.

Online Textbook

The online textbook includes more than just practice problems—it has answers to selected problems, which you can use to check your work. There is also a search feature, which allows you to quickly look up prior concepts that you may need to review. The Visual Glossary has definitions of math vocabulary and, when necessary, provides images to help illustrate the concept.

There is a section of the online textbook that is not available in the physical textbook called Student Resources. In this section, you can find the Companion Workbook, which has extra problems that model the example problems in the online textbook for extra instruction. The Practice and Problem Solving Workbook has extra worksheets to practice your skills. The Homework Video Tutor section features videos with math experts explaining mathematical concepts relevant to the lesson.

PowerGeometry

This website has practice problems, videos, and interactives that align directly with each lesson in your textbook. These can be found on the Instruction slide of many of the lessons.

Backpack Resources

In the course backpack, you will find the answer key for the Practice and Problem-Solving Exercises. In the Resource Packets folder, there is a link for each unit of the course. Checking your answers and correcting mistakes is a key component of active learning. In the Web Links folder, there is a document with links to all available Gizmo activities. These activities may be useful for reviewing previously learned concepts.

Reflection

Before each unit test, you will have a chance to reflect on your work in the unit and your readiness to take the assessment. This pause to self-reflect can be helpful as you identify where to spend the most time reviewing for a test. You will also have the opportunity to reflect on yourself as a learner.

Grade Book Weights

The percentages assigned to the various assessment types in this course add up to 100%. Becoming familiar with the types of assessments and their Grade Book weights will help you understand the impact each assessment has on your grade. Here are the Grade Book weights for this course:

discussions – 10%
participation – 5%
portfolios – 15%
quick checks – 5%
quizzes – 20%
tests – 45%
As you can see, unit tests carry the greatest weight, so they count the most toward your final grade. Although quick checks and quizzes carry less weight, they will prepare you for the types of questions included on the tests.

Early in the course, your grade average will not include every type of assessment. As a result, it may be unrepresentative of your final grade. After completing a full unit of lessons, you will have a more accurate indication of how you are doing.

CA Logo	Tip: The grade weights in your course may vary slightly from these values. Refer to your Grade Book. 
WorkPad

WorkPad is a tool you can use to show your work on online assessments for some questions. If you intend to use a method other than WorkPad to show your work on assessments, please reach out to your teacher for support.

Reflections

Before quizzes and tests, you will have the opportunity to reflect on your learning. These reflections will allow you to identify your strengths and weaknesses, revisit topics, and reach out to your Learning Coach and/or teacher for help.

Portfolios

Throughout this course, there will be portfolios assigned that require more than one lesson to complete. There are reminders to help you pace yourself, but as an active learner, it is your responsibility to work on the portfolio throughout the unit. Portfolios always have rubrics accompanying them so you will know exactly how your teacher will calculate your grade.